Title: 7 principles of stuff-raising
Date: 2014-10-05 14:20
Author: admin
Category: Ideas
Slug: 7-principles-of-stuff-raising
Status: published

[fusion\_text]

### [![Camp sign](http://www.jeffsidea.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/stevenson-e1419461803515-300x261.png)](http://www.jeffsidea.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/stevenson-e1419462066892.png)They call it an Impact Tour.

You board a yellow school bus, which takes you to one of the many places
funded in part by the [United Way](http://www.unitedway.ca/). Today, our
destination was the [Stevenson Children's
Camp](http://www.stevensonchildrenscamp.ca/), just outside of London,
Ontario.

A few miles outside of town, the bus turns onto a gravel drive under a
white wooden sign, stenciled with the name of the camp. "Pretty lousy
sign", I thought, noting the flaking paint on the plywood and the
amateurish look of the thing. On either side are corn fields, making the
drive in seem like a tunnel, with the corn at full maturity. The bus
bounces over potholes as it winds down the path, finally opening up into
a small yard, surrounded by a number of buildings.

We're met by a young man named Jason, who identifies himself as the
camp's director. He's relatively new to the job, but he has some
experience here - he was a 'camper' when he was younger. He leads the
group to one of the nearby buildings, and patiently waits while the
group makes their way inside.

"This is the dining hall", he starts off, addressing the 30-odd people
gathered in the modest, wood-frame building about the size of a
basketball court. They feed 96 kids in here, three times a day. In the
back, a small commercial kitchen is in need to repair, something they
have planned for this winter.

Jason tells us more about the campers, who aren't here on this warm
September day. They're kids between 7 and 10 who, for whatever reason,
face difficult life challenges and wouldn't otherwise have the
opportunity to attend camp. They're often referred by schools and
community resource centres, but sometimes it's the Ministry of Children
and Youth Services that drop them off, often unplanned, as a safe place
until a foster home can be found. There's a fee to attend - it's
\$15/week - though many can't pay, so they often waive it.

The next stop is the craft hall. It's about half the size of the dining
hall, with similar construction and minimalist, wood-frame construction.
Around the perimeter of the hall are shelves stocked with random
materials for crafts. Jason says they get donations of random materials,
and it's always a challenge for the camp counsellors to come up with new
craft ideas using only what's on hand. Today they're pleased to have
received some cardboard - always a hit. A colleague nudges me and
recounts the many times he's broken down boxes from large IT shipments,
and put them out for recycling. This place needs cardboard, while we
discard it by the truckload. Hold that thought - we're moving again.

Across the grass we go, passing a medium-sized pool surrounded by chain
link fence. He also points out the breezeway, a covered-porch type area
that connects the dining and rec halls together. It's concrete, and
filled with picnic tables; a great place to get the kids out of the sun
to have some ice cream. Across the yard is a modern-looking outdoor play
set, graciously donated by a local company. The groundskeeper has the
lawnmower going, and it's a noisy walk across the damp grass to the
sleep cabins.

Consistent with the rest of the buildings, the sleep cabins are
rudimentary, wood frame construction. Inside is a honeycomb of rooms
with bare walls, each with 4 bunk beds. Jason explains how they organize
the campers by age / gender, and where the counsellors stay to keep tabs
on the campers. This can be a pretty rowdy place, he says, though after
a few days in the kids are worn out from constant activities, and tend
to fall asleep quickly.

Again, Jason tells us more about the campers. He's a vivid storyteller
with an infectious enthusiasm, and this crowd isn't missing a word he
says. They have problems here, he tells us. Some kids have head lice,
which they'll clean up at intake, day or night. Behavioural issues are
common, but everyone here has the resolve to work through it, imagining
what life challenges the child must face, and hoping the camp experience
will help. Some children, Jason tells us, grow up without supportive
adults in their life, and they're used to people giving up on them - but
that won't happen here. Lots of turnaround stories start with one person
who is willing to care, and they're determined to be that person.

The next stop was the bathroom / shower building. Built of concrete
blocks, it had the same rows of sinks and showers you might find at any
public campground. It felt dingy, cold and damp today, though Jason
tells us it gets very humid in the heat of summer. Jason stops near a
wall - probably the one that separates the girls section from the boys -
which is covered in wood shelves, each with its own little door.

These shelves, we're told, contain extra personal care and clothing
items, which the staff use to supplement their belongings when kids show
up empty-handed. It's important that every kid be accepted by the social
group, and having the same kind / quality of personal effects helps.
They even have backpacks, some ready to go, for kids that get dropped
off with just the clothes on their back. At this, I notice, tears well
up in the eyes of some visitors, who consider how these meagre
belongings might be a step up for some kids.

The remaining buildings - staff cabins, a small medical centre, the Rec
hall, and an administration office - all follow the same template. There
are also walking trails, complete with rope-course challenges, and a
huge fire pit, for the obligatory roasting of marshmallows, and singing
of silly songs.

Before climbing back aboard the bus, a representative of United Way
steps in to remind us that, of course, none of this would be possible
without generous donors like us. The camp is funded in part by United
Way, but also runs its own fundraising initiatives and rents out the
facilities for extra income.

Onboard the bus and winding down the dusty path to the road, we make a
turn onto the road, underneath that same dilapidated sign. This time,
however, the sign bears new meaning, and seems to strangely embody the
minimalist, hand-built ethos of this whole place.

Impact Tour, indeed.

Beyond fundraising
------------------

If you've read this far, you might be wondering what this story has to
do with technology, and why it appears in this blog. Like many of you,
I've spent my career building business capability, solving technical
problems, and re-wiring process flows for optimal efficiency and effect.
Now, reflecting on the Impact Tour, I can't help but think "this is the
best we can do"?

Let me explain.

I have tremendous respect for the United Way, and similar agencies, and
the work that they do. The demand for help is insatiable, and there is
great benefit in providing the infrastructure to collect, redistribute
and administer charitable programs that optimally balance supply and
demand.  They also administer a portfolio of social programs that
benefit the community in different ways.

What strikes me is that the whole concept of charitable giving, of
asking for money and then redistributing it, seems so - inefficient. How
can an agency hope to penetrate the consciousness of a busy
professional, otherwise occupied by the 24/7 demands of modern life, and
convince her to make a donation? How can Jason articulate his need for
cardboard, a pillow, or a pink "Dora the Explorer" T-shirt, without
navigating bureaucracy? How can a system, where every actor has aligned
values and interests, have such low yield?

There must be a better way. Not to replace the existing model, but to
accelerate it, personalize it, make it more adaptive and responsive. A
way for Jason to express a need for 'stuff', and have a willing
community fulfil it, just like that. Call it 'stuff-raising'.

As I think about it, a system like this would operate on 7 key design
principles.

1.  ### Specific.

    <p>
    Needs should be expressed in a modular, highly specific way. Think
    about how you receive birthday gift recommendations for your
    friends' kids; 'Bauer Vapor X80 Hockey Shoulder Pads' is much more
    specific than 'he's into hockey', making it more actionable with
    less cognitive load. We need our team of charitable givers to be
    handed a shopping list.

2.  ### Personalized.

    <p>
    As someone who has 'joined the team', my profile should help set
    some parameters around how, where and when I'm able to help. There
    may be causes I favor, price points I can bear, locations I spend
    time in, or a category of goods I get special deals on. This data,
    when joined with what we can track of actual behavior, becomes a way
    to personalize how the individual is engaged, and avoid being
    spammy.

3.  ### Contextual.

    <p>
    Foursquare knows I'm downtown, and recommends the Pad Thai across
    the street. This location-based, contextual trigger can be highly
    effective, prompting spontaneous action. Jason's call for the Dora
    t-shirt should pop when I'm at the mall, or on the first cold day of
    fall when I'm packing up the summer clothes.

4.  ### Gamified.

    <p>
    People do silly things for point or badges. Perhaps it's part social
    proof - evidence of your good nature and contribution to society -
    or a small competitive streak. Whatever the reason, your
    contributions should be tallied and broadcast in a way that creates
    status and allows for extrinsic gratification.

5.  ### Predictive.

    <p>
    Jason will need some help to pull together the shopping list. Using
    data from past experience and similar requests, the system predicts
    demand, lead times and availability of recurring supplies, and makes
    recommendations for Jason to accept. After a while, he's just
    dealing with exceptions.

6.  ### Closed loop.

    <p>
    A feedback loop should help validate that my contribution mattered,
    and offer a place to share qualitative information or dialogue. If I
    bought a bag of potatoes, I'd love to know that the kids "liked" the
    Tuesday night dinner.

7.  ### Fun.

    <p>
    The whole experience should be fast, simple, well-branded, and fun.
    Heck, it might even be a little quirky and make me feel like I'm
    part of this little club. The infrastructure makes it easy to
    drop-off and transport goods, minimizing inconvenience and working
    into my daily flow. I help, I feel good, and I wasn't
    inconvenienced, isn't that fun?

Making it happen
----------------

Who would build something like this? Has it already been done? Is it too
crazy - just the product the Silicon Valley philosophy that engineering
can solve everything, even something as squishy and human as charitable
giving? Perhaps things are just fine the way they are?

I don't think it will come from a profit motive; this isn't the sort of
platform you jam with ads or charge \$2.99 to download. It must come,
paradoxically, from the same community that would use it. A blend of
engineers, designers, data scientists, behavioural economists,
charitable foundations - and folks like Jason - stirred up and charged
with the cause. I imagine this team, huddled in the
[Tannery](http://www.communitech.ca/connect/the-communitech-hub/),
obsessing over fill rates, subscriber growth and the virility of the
explainer video, just like every other growth hacking little start-up.

We know how to do this. Marketers herd us into manipulated behaviour
every day. They use surgical precision to target and influence, and we
don't even know it's happening. Apps track our every move as the world
dynamically adjusts to present a context optimized for buying.

Surely, then, we can figure out how to get Jason that Dora t-shirt, on
demand, from an army of willing and able volunteers. Maybe we can even
find someone willing to build a new sign.[/fusion\_text]
