Title: Customer Support, Disrupted
Date: 2013-10-24 16:23
Author: admin
Category: Strategy
Slug: customer-support-disrupted
Status: published

[![B4B
Book](http://www.jeffsidea.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/tsia_B4B.jpg)](http://www.jeffsidea.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/tsia_B4B.jpg)In
the era of cloud computing, as-a-service consumption models, and the
consumerization of IT, the role of Customer Support for technology
vendors is changing fast.  It is no longer enough to do break/fix work
better, faster & cheaper - the support organization must re-invent
itself as a driver for business growth by delivering business outcomes
and powering consumption of the product itself.

Such is the argument put forth in a new book entitled [B4B: How
Technology and Big Data Are Reinventing the Customer-Supplier
Relationship](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0986046205/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0986046205&linkCode=as2&tag=govideos-20&linkId=4BUJFXCIZUYR63US),
co-authored by support industry visionaries [J.B.
Wood](http://www.amazon.com/J.-B.-Wood/e/B003R85S2C/), [Todd
Hewlin](http://www.amazon.com/s/ref=ntt_athr_dp_sr_2?ie=UTF8&field-author=Todd+Hewlin&search-alias=books&text=Todd+Hewlin&sort=relevancerank) and
[Thomas
Lah](http://www.amazon.com/s/ref=ntt_athr_dp_sr_3?ie=UTF8&field-author=Thomas+Lah&search-alias=books&text=Thomas+Lah&sort=relevancerank).
 Having spent the last few days discussing this issue with colleagues at
the [Technology Services Industry Association](http://www.tsia.com/)'s
fall conference in Las Vegas, I can see both consensus & trepidation in
an industry accustomed to a business model we've had for decades.

Everything is changing.  The IT department is less powerful in
technology decision making, meaning technology vendors are interfacing
with business users directly.  Cloud-based delivery means we can't
monetize complexity with services to make it all work.  The customer
expects to pay as value is delivered, not in a big lump sum at the
beginning.  As an industry, we cannot ignore these trends.  We must
adapt.

That adaptation will be powered by big data.  With our products
producing an ever-increasing volume of data exhaust tracking every
aspect of the user behavior, we're more enabled than ever to draw deep
insights and influence change.  Imagine a world where the service
organization proactively monitors how customers use the product, and
engages with a helpful intervention when usage falls below thresholds.
 Suddenly, the notion of a "service event" can arise not just from a
usage fault, but also from NON-usage.

The Service teams can hit a home run with this mandate.  We already
understand the customer, and naturally take their perspective.  We
understand the product, and the full value potential the customer might
realize from it.  We're hard-wired to be helpful, wishing for our
customers to get the most out of our products.  We're also pretty
logical, so data speaks to us - and the insights drawn from a hard set
of facts is something we can act on.

A new era is upon us.  Let us seize the day, and shift Customer Support
out of the back-office and into a role where we eliminate friction,
accelerate adoption, and fuel the core business itself.   What an
exciting opportunity.
