Title: Dynamic Complexity
Date: 2010-10-12 19:35
Author: admin
Category: Ideas
Slug: dynamic-complexity
Status: published

[three\_fourth last="no" spacing="yes" background\_color=""
background\_image="" background\_repeat="no-repeat"
background\_position="left top" border\_size="0px" border\_color=""
border\_style="" padding="" class="" id=""][fusion\_text]When I started
my career, my professional world was filled with detail complexity.
Intricate coding problems, complex application integrations, resilient
systems architectures, etc. I chased the technology into every corner
looking for more detail that I could squeeze out of it - the complexity
delighted me.

My move into leadership was about complexity too. The challenges of
technology have finite complexity, while people are infinitely complex,
I reasoned. What I didn’t anticipate at the time was the extent of the
\*dynamic\* complexity that leaders need to manage, if you hope to
produce a result in a complex organization.

Dynamic complexity is all about how things work together, as a system.
Every action by every actor in the system has some effect on the
dynamics of the whole, influencing the outcome in ways that are
anticipated, surprising, or unnoticed. To achieve results in this
environment, a leader needs to press on all of the right levers, in the
right order, at the right time - while everybody else is pressing levers
too.

John Sterman wrote a book called [Business
Dynamics](http://web.mit.edu/jsterman/www/BusDyn2.html) that brings this
concept down to earth, and provides some tools to help you navigate
these complex systems. It’s heavy, but worth a read. Once you come to
see the world as a system, and you understand the dynamics, you can
begin to apply reason and logic to even the most chaotic situation.
Personalities, agendas, organizational designs, roles, politics all
become less relevant to the end result, since they’re really just
properties of the system, and like any other property, can be considered
rationally in your planning.

Do you have an understanding of the system you operate in? When you
pressed a lever today, did you consider the dynamic
impact?[/fusion\_text][/three\_fourth][one\_fourth last="yes"
spacing="yes" background\_color="" background\_image=""
background\_repeat="no-repeat" background\_position="left top"
border\_size="0px" border\_color="" border\_style="solid" padding=""
class=""
id=""][fusion\_code]<iframe style="width: 120px; height: 240px;" src="//ws-na.amazon-adsystem.com/widgets/q?ServiceVersion=20070822&amp;OneJS=1&amp;Operation=GetAdHtml&amp;MarketPlace=US&amp;source=ss&amp;ref=ss_til&amp;ad_type=product_link&amp;tracking_id=jeffsidea-20&amp;marketplace=amazon&amp;region=US&amp;placement=007238915X&amp;asins=007238915X&amp;linkId=2TFKR3ELCNTJSRVJ&amp;show_border=true&amp;link_opens_in_new_window=true" width="300" height="150" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no">  
</iframe>[/fusion\_code][/one\_fourth]
