Title: Fly your project team in formation
Date: 2013-11-07 22:46
Author: admin
Category: Ideas
Slug: fly-your-project-team-in-formation
Status: published

The project is off the rails. There goal was to migrate a service from
an old platform to a new one, but at 70% done, the performance of the
new system isn't satisfactory, and there are key functional gaps. Smart
people offer ideas, but nobody is taking responsibility. All components
report green on their end, but the engine won't start. Troubleshooting
degrades into blamestorming, opinions masquerade as facts, and
productivity plummets. Fractures form in the team, putting people on
defence and further reducing the chance of recovery. The executives are
getting antsy, and the reasons for delay more creative. The project
turns yellow, and finally turns red.

Have you been there? Good chance you have, since according to a
[McKinsey
study](http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/business_technology/delivering_large-scale_it_projects_on_time_on_budget_and_on_value)
of 5,400 large scale IT projects, the average runs 45% over budget,
delivers 56% less value than predicted, and 17% of the time, they go so
badly that they can threaten the very existence of the company. As a
technology industry, how do we get this so wrong?

At the risk of over-simplifying a very complex problem, allow me to
offer a basic theory of project performance.

My thesis is this: *Rational people with a shared goal, given the same
facts in the same context, make similar decisions and behave in a
predictable way.* Teams in this state are said to be 'calibrated', and
respond predictably as individual actors in a system progressing along a
planned path. However, if a team is or becomes poorly calibrated,
individual actors in the system will behave differently than other
actors would have behaved in the same situation, and as this skew
compounds with time, the integrity and performance of the team degrades.

In short, projects are failing because the team is not calibrated.

> Rational people with a shared goal, given the same facts in the same
> context, make similar decisions and behave in a predictable way.

To visualize the concept, imagine a group of aircraft, relying on visual
reference to maintain formation. As the group enters a cloud, each pilot
becomes disoriented and no longer respond consistently to flight leader
instructions. For example, a "left turn" to the pilot who has
inadvertently rotated 90 degrees will send him sharply down toward the
earth, while the rest of the formation (who did not rotate) turns west.
Poor calibration leads every member of the team to follow the
instructions and behave "correctly" from their position, but with
erratic results.

As a project manager or a leader, what this means is that to restore
project performance, you must restore a state of calibration. There are
three key dimensions:

1. Context
----------

Every project has requirements or user stories that help define what is
to be built, and how it should operate. Context, however, lies behind
those requirements, with the business that will receive the benefit from
the success of the project. Why do the requirement exist, why are they
important, and how do they serve to fulfil the larger goals of the
organization? The team will defer to the context to make judgement calls
and fill in gaps where the requirements are not clear.

2. Planning
-----------

The work plan needs to clearly articulate the work to be done, who is
responsible for it, and when it's due. More importantly, it needs to
call out the dependencies and isolate the work on the "critical path"
for special attention by the entire team. The plan must be net of any
priority conflicts or other work that may impact delivery, and represent
the committed and achievable plan. Every piece of work needs to tie into
the master plan which, when viewed as a whole, can help members of the
team understand how they fit into the overall outcome.

3. Facts
--------

The team must be operating from a shared set of facts. A fact is either
a known and quantifiable piece of data, or an assumption that has been
declared and ratified by the team. The machine won't operate with the
switch in the "maybe" position, so there must be certainty in how facts
are understood, communicated and used by the team.

A state of calibration is a beautiful thing. Like a soccer team in the
middle of an important match, they understand all aspects of why they're
here, the stakes and consequences of the outcome, the expectations of
their role, the current score and the orders from the coach for the next
play. They respond to challenges individually, and then regroup to
review what has changed and calibrate again. This iteration continues
until the game is over. The context, plan and facts are understood and
uncontested, so everyone moves together.

Consider a project you've involved in, that isn't going according to
plan. Is the team flying in formation?
