Title: Introducing SmileBit - the self-awareness sidekick
Date: 2014-04-22 21:16
Author: admin
Category: Ideas
Slug: introducing-smilebit-the-self-awareness-sidekick
Status: published

[![Smiley
face](http://www.jeffsidea.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/2000px-Smiley.svg-300x300.png)](http://www.jeffsidea.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/2000px-Smiley.svg-e1419436375893.png)I
love my [FitBit](https://www.fitbit.com/ "Fitbit"). A small pedometer I
carry with me, it measures my physical activity and stores it online for
analysis. There is something about data - a state of knowing,
objectively, vs an approximation built from memory - that drives deep
into my subconscious and rattles me.

I may act on the data or not, but there is no room to hide - the facts
stand. In the back of my mind, constantly whirring away, my brain
processes these facts, and taunts my conscious mind to act on them.

#### What if there were a FitBit to measure the impact that our words and actions have on other people?

Imagine this little device, carried in your pocket. For each interaction
you have with others, it senses the impact of the exchange on the other
person, across a spectrum of emotions. Joy, gratitude, interest,
amusement, hope, inspiration - these register as positive values on the
meter. Aversion, indifference, fear, anger, frustration and
disappointment register a negative value. One glance at the device
screen provides instant feedback - you're being a jerkwad, a mensch, or
something in between. The sum of these scores throughout the day, week
or month become your "Smile Score" (SS). Plus SS (+SS) is good, Negative
SS (-SS) is bad. Track your SS over time, earn badges and constantly
seek improvement through goal setting and regular challenges.

How might this change our behavior? If the SS score of an interaction
surprises us, perhaps we dig a little deeper to find out why. We strive
for win/win negotiations. We talk openly about goals, and approaches to
get there. We seek alignment and ask a lot more questions. We wrestle
with negative trends and look for systemic changes. We become more
self-aware, sensitized to how our actions impact those around us.

Deep down inside, we all want to believe we're making a positive
difference in the world, and leaving a trail of +SS is a pretty good
sign we're on the right track. Conversely, -SS helps us understand why
we feel blocked at every turn, and gives us enough data to make
adjustments.

Of course, this device will need apps. One will alert you when someone
with chronic -SS is nearby, so you can make your escape. Heatmaps of the
office will track patterns by location so you can choose the best
watercooler. [Glassdoor](http://www.glassdoor.com "Glassdoor") will
report the average SS of employees, so you can avoid applying for a job
at Camp Crusty. If your SS drops below average because you're having a
bad day, an app displays some LOLCats to get things back on track. On
really good days, you're reminded to take on your toughest challenge,
while in the best possible frame of mind.

And that's just the beginning - just wait until the developers get their
hands on the API!

Alas, there is not SmileBit. I guess we'll all just have to go on
assuming that - in the absence of better data - we're pretty much just
super-awesome, all the time. As you were.
