Title: Operations killed the Customer Service star
Date: 2013-11-10 14:08
Author: admin
Category: Ideas, Operations
Slug: operations-killed-the-customer-service-star
Status: published

For many companies, customer service is purely a numbers game. Average
handle time, first call resolution, cost per call - this business has
been optimized into a factory of brisk, consistent, vanilla support
transactions. Where possible, we use IVR or self service automation to
take those imperfect and expensive humans right out of the equation, and
quality measures derived from survey feedback convince us that customers
are happy. It's a perfect system.

Ok, hang on a second. Customers are the life-blood of our business, and
the fact that they're asking for service means they need our help. In
their time of need, at the point when their loyalty is most vulnerable,
our plan is to stick to the script and get this over with as fast as
possible?

Social is different
-------------------

Service executives are learning that Social Media is different. You're
not being "social" when every tweet comes from an anonymous corporate
account, and directs the customer to call. Your vanilla responses will
come off as tone deaf and disengaged. Customers notice when you only
respond to the noisy complaints.

Instead, social needs to be a conversation. A brand ambassador - a human
with a heart, an identity and a genuine desire to help - takes the time
to understand the need and resolves the issue in a quirky and personal
way, as humans tend to do.

The ops folks are rattled by the whole concept. The cost, the risk, the
inconsistency - it can never work! Can't we get those customers to call
us?

Service disruption
------------------

Social media is more than a channel - it is disrupting the business of
customer service overall. Many companies are feeling the heat, and not
all are responding well. In fact, [Frank
Eliason](https://twitter.com/FrankEliason), in an article on
[Quartz](http://qz.com/145593/social-media-customer-service-is-a-failure-2),
went so far as to declare that social media customer service is a
"failure".

I see it differently. The current challenges are short term - the result
of deeply entrenched operational behaviours. Long term, organizations
learn how to observe and quantify the benefits that true social
engagement creates, and the economics turn upside down. At some point,
the added value derived from a meaningful, public interaction with a
customer gets assigned a dollar value, and it becomes quaint - or even
foolish - to provide factory service and waive the opportunity to
realize that benefit.

The transformation
------------------

It's then, and only then, when operations says "can't they just tweet
us"? The support team members are encouraged to express their
individuality and creativity, making the customer service interaction
rich and meaningful. Our industry gets our mojo back, and service
becomes a strategic priority for the CEO.

And customers? Well, I'm guessing they would like to be treated as an
individual, and have a real conversation.

It's happening, and it's awesome.
