Title: 12 steps to converting a customer crisis into loyalty
Date: 2013-09-01 16:18
Author: Jeff Schnurr
Slug: 12-steps-to-converting-a-customer-crisis-into-loyalty
Tags: problem solving,crisis,communication
Status: published

### Your customer is furious.

They have a critical business dependency on your product, and some
glitch has degraded it or taken it completely out of service.   They
turn to you, and the technical support team, to make things right.  Fix
it
**now**.
If you're in technical support, you've seen this movie before.  Bring in
the engineers, order pizza, pore over stack traces into the wee hours of
the morning - work the problem until it's resolved.  For an adrenaline
junkie, it's a fun ride - but your customer, and your business, won't
see it that way - there is an erosion of confidence, a risk to the
account, a blemish on your corporate image.

However, in all crisis there is opportunity.

In this case, you're set to prove that your team not only has the
technical competency to solve complex problems, but that you truly
understand what the customer needs, and your empathy is genuine.  In
fact, you're about to prove how committed you are to this customer, and
just how much they can count on you when there is a problem.

![frustration1](<{filename}/images/frustration1-300x296.gif>){.pull-right}
Let's examine some of the best practices, developed over years of
technical support incidents with Fortune 500 customers, that can truly
impact the outcome of an otherwise bad situation.

### Under fire - the 12 behaviors that prove you care

### 1. It's our problem

In modern IT environments, the root cause of technical problems can be
anywhere - in your software, another vendor's software, the
configuration, the integrations - perhaps even caused by external
factors like network latency or unusual demand profiles.   Regardless of
what technology component is to blame, remember that it's not the
*technology* that has a problem, it's your *customer* that has a
problem.

Your role is to step up and assume ownership regardless of where the
problem lies.  We’re in the sinking boat with the customer — it may be
academically interesting that we’re not the boat manufacturer and don’t
supply leak repair kits, but we’re about to drown too.  Act like it.

### 2. Agree

Customers in a crisis situation are under a lot of stress, and people
react differently to stressful events.  The technical contacts have
executives breathing down their necks, and everybody is edgy.  As the
vendor, you take a lot of heat - it's easy to point the frustration at
you. In all cases where it is reasonably possible, find a way to use
agreeable and affirmative words like “yes”, “true”, and “I agree”.

It’s particularly useful to agree on points that identify a failure on
behalf of your team or technology, as it promptly illustrates that
you’re not defensive.

### 3. Frame the situation

On a regular basis, take a minute to step back from the details of the
diagnosis and orient everyone as to what we’re trying to do. This
“forest for the trees” approach ensures that everyone is in sync on the
relevant importance of the immediate task at hand, and how it fits into
the big picture.

> A resolution strategy includes a working theory and a plan to prove
> it.

This is particularly important for technical teams, as ‘geeks’ tend to
see a technical problem as an end, not a means to an end. Top down
framing will help identify those cases where our attention is
inappropriately diverted, or how critical the present task is in the
resolution strategy. When this is done well, the entire audience need
not be subject matter experts to agree we’re spending time on the next
most logical thing.

### 4. Set, and keep, deadlines

There is a phenomena amongst technical people that I have observed for
many years, and I bet you've seen it too.  Deep into the problem
solving, a theory emerges as to the root cause, and there is just a
short distance left before we confirm the theory and have our answer.

How long?  10 minutes.  10 minutes later, it's another 10 minutes.  Then
30, oh maybe by 4.  Ok, tonight for sure.  By morning I promise!

There is a deep conviction inside the problem solver that is absolutely
sure they have it.  It's not stalling, it's very real.  Unfortunately,
it's not always correct - and without the discipline to chop the effort
and move on, you can end up chasing a theory for far too long.

The only solution is deadlines - written and irrevocable - that identify
the next step in the diagnostic plan.   Set them, and keep them!

### 5. Separate the technical from the business

When a major IT system experiences a service disruption, two primary
groups respond; the IT folks and the business that’s affected.  In
providing service to these two diverse groups, it’s best to utilize two
discreet channels.

> Technical and business teams need different information.

The *technical channel* is detail oriented, fluid, and 24/7. The
*business channel* is high level roll-up, periodic briefings, and
oriented around impact assessment & timeliness. For obvious reasons,
these channels demand different resource allocation; it’s rare to find
one person who can manage both channels well.

### 6. Close all gaps in understanding

During the diagnosis phase, lots of information flows around in support
of the effort. In all cases, never let information pass that you either
don’t understand or disagree with; ask for clarification.

> Challenge the facts openly, in front of the customer. Everybody needs
> to understand the facts, and how we got them.

This goes for information supplied by your own colleagues; if it demands
clarification, openly ask for such right then and there. Doing this in
front of the customer helps them feel included in the process,
demonstrates that we’re willing to be vulnerable and not pretend we have
all of the answers, and that we’re challenging ourselves in the interest
of the truth.

### 7. Assess impact accurately

Sometimes, it can be tempting to jump to problem solving before you
understand the scope & scale of the problem itself. Impact assessment is
a valuable step in the process for many reasons. Primarily, it helps
calibrate severity. Secondly, it is vital data for framing and plotting
a diagnostic strategy.

Many times, a “critical” problem is affecting only one important user,
or an average severity problem is actually a global service degradation
that’s just not quite bad enough to provoke a flood of customer
complaints.

### 8. Be crisp & authoritative

Crisis events are no time for wishy-washy commitments or positions.

It takes some self confidence to do so, but strong terms and hard
commitments/positions are mandatory in this environment. It can be
difficult for engineering types to swallow, but this can often require
80% probabilities to be stated categorically, just to avoid the
inflammatory nature of sounding unsure. “I think this will work” is very
different than “This is our recommendation”.

Even if you don’t know, you can be certain you don’t know. If you’re
using hedge words or sound like you’re not sure, you’re providing fuel
for a perception that leads to unnecessary escalation & tension.

### 9. Explain why

Generally speaking, most reasonable people reach the same conclusions
when coming from the same perspective and provided all of the same
facts. On this premise, taking the time to explain “why”, even when
you’re not asked, is time well spent.

> “Why” is the grease that keeps everything flowing smoothly.

Do this for everything — even something simple, like “the next update
will by at 7 pm” begs the question “why not 6:30?” or “can they really
get me something material that quick?”. If you follow the diagnosis,
statements and expectations with some commentary on the why, people have
a chance to understand, and if required, challenge the thinking that
lead to your assertion. Done well, this exposes ample opportunity to
flush out inconsistencies in premise and get people thinking with the
same rationale.

### 10. Take all the heavy lifting

IT problem diagnosis is often a labor intensive proposition.

There is data to collect, scripts to run, test environments to
configure, results to parse, debug flags to be set, etc.  Many steps may
be necessary over the course of the diagnosis, and in many cases it is
easier or more convenient for you to ask the customer to perform the
action, as you might normally do in a standard problem diagnostic
process.

> Let the customer focus on the impact of the problem, while you focus
> on solving the problem.

Well, this isn't a normal circumstance - the customer needs time to
handle the internal pressures of a service impacting event on their
business, and they need you to operate independently.  If you're chasing
them constantly for help where it's strictly not required, you'll be
perceived as not "stepping up", and it can look like a stall tactic.

Own this - don't ask the customer unless there is no other way.  It will
make them more receptive to responding promptly & positively to the
requests for help that you *do* make.

### 11. Lose some sleep

“Who doesn't sleep until this is fixed?” is an important question that
drives at the heart of accountability. To be sure, your customer fits
this description; don’t let them be the only one.

A single person needs to be held accountable for marshaling the
resources required to get the customer what they need. This can’t be a
“team”; when everyone is responsible, nobody is responsible.

Designate the in-charge person, share that name & phone number with your
customer, and make sure they know you're there 24/7 until this is fixed.

### 12. Debrief & learn from the experience

Whew - problem solved.  Some well deserved rest, and on to the next one,
right?  Not exactly! At the heart of good execution is the incorporation
of lessons learned into the modus operandi. Take the time to conduct a
full retrospective analysis after the dust settles; talk to everyone
involved (including the customer), and feed what you learn back into the
process.

> Make a commitment to the customer to debrief when the incident is
> over.

Commitment to a debrief is a useful tactical tool during the crisis as
well, allowing for complaints or unhelpful observations by frustrated
people to be channeled into a transparent process *after* we’ve solved
the problem. It sends the message that you’re willing to listen, just
not right now. 

***Technical Support is not for the faint of heart.***  For those
of you supporting enterprise customers on mission critical systems, I
hope that you find this information helpful.  For as much as it may not
feel that way at the time, these events really do cement a high-trust,
enduring relationship between you and your customer, and amongst the
support team as well - everybody is stronger after the battle.

Good luck!
