Title: The Plan
Date: 2010-10-25 00:38
Author: Jeff Schnurr
Slug: the-plan
Status: published

To get a result in a matter of even modest complexity, you need a plan.
As defined by Wikipedia, a plan is “…a set of intended actions, through
which one expects to achieve a goal”. I would add that a plan needs to
be a noun — something of substance and durability. Ideally, it’s written
down. You might even title it *The Plan*.

The Plan is the plan until it is changed through some recognized and
agreed process. We might present alternative options, recommend
amendments, critique or resist the plan, but none of that changes the
fact that as a matter of record, The Plan is what we’re doing.

This is an empowering principle for the team that’s implementing The
Plan. It serves as a clear partition between what we’re officially
doing, and the noise that arises while we’re doing it. One can work The
Plan with confidence, knowing you’re aligned with the team and heading
in the same direction. The Plan is resolute, stable & consistent. If
you’re implementing what The Plan requires, you’re sure to be on the
right track.

Disruptors are empowered too. If you want to lobby for a change, the
owner if The Plan is the only one you need to convince. If you succeed,
The Plan is updated, and the implementers fall in line to deliver the
revised version of The Plan.

You don’t have to be a project manager to work this way. It’s a simple
principle, and a way to bring clarity and provide stable direction in a
world that changes fast.
